# 3 Terms, definitions, and abbreviated terms

## 3.1 Terms and definitions

For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply.

ISO and IEC maintain terminological databases for use in standardization at the following addresses:

- IEC Electropedia: available at <http://www.electropedia.org>
- ISO Online browsing platform: available at <http://www.iso.org/obp>
- IEEE Standards Dictionary Online: available at <http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/dictionary.jsp>

Definitions for other terms typically can be found in ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765, System and software engineering — Vocabulary, available at <www.computer.org/sevocab>.

### 3.1.1 acquirer

stakeholder that acquires or procures a product or service from a supplier

Note 1 to entry: Other terms commonly used for an acquirer are buyer, customer, owner, purchaser or internal/organizational sponsor.

### 3.1.2 acquisition

process of obtaining a system, product or service

### 3.1.3 activity

set of cohesive tasks of a process

### 3.1.4 agile development

software development approach based on iterative development, frequent inspection and adaptation, and incremental deliveries, in which requirements and solutions evolve through collaboration in cross‐functional teams and through continual stakeholder feedback
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 26515: 2011]

### 3.1.5 agreement

mutual acknowledgement of terms and conditions under which a working relationship is conducted

EXAMPLE Contract, memorandum of agreement.

### 3.1.6 architecture

\<system> fundamental concepts or properties of a system in its environment embodied in its elements, relationships, and in the principles of its design and evolution

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011]

### 3.1.7 architecture framework

conventions, principles and practices for the description of architectures established within a specific domain of application and/or community of stakeholders

EXAMPLE 1 Generalised Enterprise Reference Architecture and Methodologies (GERAM) [ISO 15704] is an architecture framework.

EXAMPLE 2 Reference Model of Open Distributed Processing (RM‐ODP) [ISO/IEC 10746] is an architecture framework.

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011]

### 3.1.8 architecture view

work product expressing the architecture of a system from the perspective of specific system concerns

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011]

### 3.1.9 architecture viewpoint

work product establishing the conventions for the construction, interpretation and use of architecture views to frame specific system concerns

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011]

### 3.1.10 audit

independent examination of a work product or set of work products to assess compliance with specifications, standards, contractual agreements, or other criteria

### 3.1.11 baseline

formally approved version of a configuration item, regardless of media, formally designated and fixed at a specific time during the configuration item’s life cycle

[SOURCE: IEEE Std 828‐2012]

### 3.1.12 business process

partially ordered set of enterprise activities that can be executed to achieve some desired end‐result in pursuit of a given objective of an organization

### 3.1.13 concept of operations

verbal and/or graphic statement, in broad outline, of an organization’s assumptions or intent in regard to an operation or series of operations

Note 1 to entry: The concept of operations frequently is embodied in long‐range strategic plans and annual operational plans. In the latter case, the concept of operations in the plan covers a series of connected operations to be carried out simultaneously or in succession. The concept is designed to give an overall picture of the organization operations. See also operational concept (3.1.28).

Note 2 to entry: It provides the basis for bounding the operating space, system capabilities, interfaces and operating environment.

[SOURCE: ANSI/AIAA G‐043A‐2012e]

### 3.1.14 concern

\<system> interest in a system relevant to one or more of its stakeholders

Note 1 to entry: A concern pertains to any influence on a system in its environment, including developmental, technological, business, operational, organizational, political, economic, legal, regulatory, ecological and social influences.

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011]

### 3.1.15 configuration item

item or aggregation of hardware, software, or both, that is designated for configuration management and treated as a single entity in the configuration management process

EXAMPLE Software, firmware, data, hardware, humans, processes (e.g., processes for providing service to users), procedures (e.g., operator instructions and user manuals), facilities, services, materials, and naturally occurring entities

### 3.1.16 customer

organization or person that receives a product or service

EXAMPLE Consumer, client, user, acquirer, buyer, or purchaser.

Note 1 to entry: A customer can be internal or external to the organization.

### 3.1.17 design, verb

\<process> to define the architecture, system elements, interfaces, and other characteristics of a system or system element

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765:2010, modified, changed ‘components’ to ‘system element’]

### 3.1.18 design, noun

result of the process in 3.1.17

Note 1 to entry: Information, including specification of system elements and their relationships, that is sufficiently complete to support a compliant implementation of the architecture

Note 2 to entry: Design provides the detailed implementation‐level physical structure, behavior, temporal relationships, and other attributes of system elements.

### 3.1.19 design characteristic

design attributes or distinguishing features that pertain to a measurable description of a product or service

### 3.1.20 enabling system

system that supports a system‐of‐interest during its life cycle stages but does not necessarily contribute directly to its function during operation

EXAMPLE A configuration management system used to control software elements during software development.

Note 1 to entry: Each enabling system has a life cycle of its own. This document is applicable to each enabling system when, in its own right, it is treated as a system‐of‐interest.

### 3.1.21 environment

\<system> context determining the setting and circumstances of all influences upon a system

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011]

### 3.1.22 facility

physical means or equipment for facilitating the performance of an action, e.g., buildings, instruments, tools

### 3.1.23 incident

anomalous or unexpected event, set of events, condition, or situation at any time during the life cycle of a project, product, service, or system

### 3.1.24 information item

separately identifiable body of information that is produced, stored, and delivered for human use

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 15289:2015]

### 3.1.25 infrastructure

hardware and software environment to support computer system and software design, development, and modification

### 3.1.26 life cycle

evolution of a system, product, service, project or other human‐made entity from conception through retirement

### 3.1.27 life cycle model

framework of processes and activities concerned with the life cycle, which can be organized into stages, acting as a common reference for communication and understanding

### 3.1.28 operational concept

verbal and graphic statement of an organization’s assumptions or intent in regard to an operation or series of operations of a system or a related set of systems

Note 1 to entry: The operational concept is designed to give an overall picture of the operations using one or more specific systems, or set of related systems, in the organization’s operational environment from the users’ and operators’ perspective. See also concept of operations (3.1.13).

[SOURCE: ANSI/AIAA G‐043A‐2012e]

### 3.1.29 operator

individual or organization that performs the operations of a system

Note 1 to entry: The role of operator and the role of user can be vested, simultaneously or sequentially, in the same individual or organization.

Note 2 to entry: An individual operator combined with knowledge, skills and procedures can be considered as an element of the system.

Note 3 to entry: An operator can perform operations on a system that is operated, or within a system that is operated, depending on whether or not operating instructions are placed within the system boundary.

### 3.1.30 organization

group of people and facilities with an arrangement of responsibilities, authorities and relationships

EXAMPLE company, corporation, firm, enterprise, institution, charity, sole trader, association, or parts or combination thereof.

Note 1 to entry: An identified part of an organization (even as small as a single individual) or an identified group of organizations can be regarded as an organization if it has responsibilities, authorities and relationships. A body of persons organized for some specific purpose, such as a club, union, corporation, or society, is an organization.

### 3.1.31 party

organization entering into an agreement

Note 1 to entry: In this document, the agreeing parties are called the acquirer and the supplier.

### 3.1.32 problem

difficulty, uncertainty, or otherwise realized and undesirable event, set of events, condition, or situation that requires investigation and corrective action

### 3.1.33 process

set of interrelated or interacting activities that transforms inputs into outputs

### 3.1.34 process outcome

observable result of the successful achievement of the process purpose

### 3.1.35 process purpose

high‐level objective of performing the process and the likely outcomes of effective implementation of the process

Note 1 to entry: The purpose of implementing the process is to provide benefits to the stakeholders.

### 3.1.36 product

result of a process

Note 1 to entry: There are four agreed generic product categories: hardware (e.g., engine mechanical part); software (e.g., computer program procedures, and possibly associated documentation and data); services (e.g., transport); and processed materials (e.g., lubricant). Hardware and processed materials are generally tangible products, while software or services are generally intangible.

### 3.1.37 project

endeavour with defined start and finish criteria undertaken to create a product or service in accordance with specified resources and requirements

Note 1 to entry: A project is sometimes viewed as a unique process comprising coordinated and controlled activities and composed of activities from the Technical Management processes and Technical processes defined in this document.

### 3.1.38 \<project> portfolio

collection of projects that addresses the strategic objectives of the organization

### 3.1.39 qualification

process of demonstrating whether an entity is capable of fulfilling specified requirements

### 3.1.40 quality assurance

part of quality management focused on providing confidence that quality requirements will be fulfilled

[SOURCE: ISO 9000:2015]

### 3.1.41 quality characteristic

inherent characteristic of a product, process or system related to a requirement

Note1 to entry: Critical quality characteristics commonly include those related to health, safety, security assurance, reliability, availability and supportability.

### 3.1.42 quality management

coordinated activities to direct and control an organization with regard to quality

### 3.1.43 release

particular version of a configuration item that is made available for a specific purpose

EXAMPLE Test release.

### 3.1.44 requirement

statement that translates or expresses a need and its associated constraints and conditions

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148:2011, modified, NOTE has been removed.]

### 3.1.45 resource

asset that is utilized or consumed during the execution of a process

Note 1 to entry: Resources include those that are reusable, renewable or consumable.

EXAMPLE diverse entities such as funding, personnel, facilities, capital equipment, tools, and utilities such as power, water, fuel and communication infrastructures.

### 3.1.46 retirement

withdrawal of active support by the operation and maintenance organization, partial or total replacement by a new system, or installation of an upgraded system

### 3.1.47 risk

effect of uncertainty on objectives

Note 1 to entry: An effect is a deviation from the expected — positive or negative. A positive effect is also known as an opportunity.

Note 2 to entry: Objectives can have different aspects (such as financial, health and safety, and environmental goals) and can apply at different levels (such as strategic, organization‐wide, project, product and process).

Note 3 to entry: Risk is often characterized by reference to potential events and consequences, or a combination of these.

Note 4 to entry: Risk is often expressed in terms of a combination of the consequences of an event (including changes in circumstances) and the associated likelihood of occurrence.

Note 5 to entry: Uncertainty is the state, even partial, of deficiency of information related to understanding or knowledge of an event, its consequence, or likelihood.

[SOURCE: ISO Guide 73:2009, definition 1.1]

### 3.1.48 safety

expectation that a system does not, under defined conditions, lead to a state in which human life, health, property, or the environment is endangered

### 3.1.49 security

protection against intentional subversion or forced failure; a composite of four attributes – confidentiality, integrity, availability, and accountability – plus aspects of a fifth, usability, all of which have the related issue of their assurance

[SOURCE: NATO AEP‐67]

### 3.1.50 service

performance of activities, work, or duties

Note 1 to entry: A service is self‐contained, coherent, discrete, and can be composed of other services.

Note 2 to entry: A service is generally an intangible product.

### 3.1.51 software element

system element that is software

### 3.1.52 software engineering

application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the development, operation, and maintenance of software; that is, the application of engineering to software

### 3.1.53 software item

source code, object code, control code, control data, or a collection of these items

Note 1 to entry: A software item can be viewed as a system element of this document and of ISO/IEC 15288:2015. Software items are typically configuration items.

### 3.1.54 software product

set of computer programs, procedures, and possibly associated documentation and data

Note 1 to entry: A software product is a software system viewed as the output (product) resulting from a process.

### 3.1.55 software system

system for which software is of primary importance to the stakeholders

Note 1 to entry: In the most general case, a software system is comprised of hardware, software, people, and manual procedures.

Note 2 to entry: In a software system, software is the leading driver in meeting system requirements.

### 3.1.56 software system element

member of a set of elements that constitute a software system

Note 1 to entry: A software system element can include one or more software units, software elements, hardware units, hardware elements, services, and other system elements and systems.

Note 2 to entry: A software system element can be viewed as a system element.

### 3.1.57 software unit

atomic‐level software component of the software architecture that can be subjected to standalone testing

Note 1 to entry: Some software units are separately compilable pieces of code.

[SOURCE: ISO 26262‐1:2011, modified, Note 1 to entry added.]

### 3.1.58 stage

period within the life cycle of an entity that relates to the state of its description or realization

Note 1 to entry: As used in this document, stages relate to major progress and achievement milestones of the entity through its life cycle.

Note 2 to entry: Stages often overlap.

### 3.1.59 stakeholder

individual or organization having a right, share, claim, or interest in a system or in its possession of characteristics that meet their needs and expectations

EXAMPLE End users, end user organizations, supporters, developers, producers, trainers, maintainers, disposers, acquirers, supplier organizations and regulatory bodies.

Note 1 to entry: Some stakeholders can have interests that oppose each other or oppose the system.

### 3.1.60 supplier

organization or an individual that enters into an agreement with the acquirer for the supply of a product or service

Note 1 to entry: Other terms commonly used for supplier are contractor, producer, seller, or vendor.

Note 2 to entry: The acquirer and the supplier sometimes are part of the same organization.

### 3.1.61 system

combination of interacting elements organized to achieve one or more stated purposes

Note 1 to entry: A system is sometimes considered as a product or as the services it provides.

Note 2 to entry: In practice, the interpretation of its meaning is frequently clarified by the use of an associative noun, e.g., aircraft system or database management system. Alternatively, the word “system” is substituted simply by a context‐ dependent synonym, e.g., aircraft or database, though this potentially obscures a system principles perspective.

Note 3 to entry: A system can include the associated equipment, facilities, material, software, firmware, technical documentation, services and personnel required for operations and support to the degree necessary for use in its intended environment.

Note 4 to entry: See for comparison: enabling system, system‐of‐interest, system of systems.

### 3.1.62 system element

member of a set of elements that constitute a system

EXAMPLE Hardware, software, data, humans, processes (e.g., processes for providing service to users), procedures (e.g., operator instructions), facilities, materials, and naturally occurring entities or any combination.

Note 1 to entry: A system element is a discrete part of a system that can be implemented to fulfill specified requirements.

### 3.1.63 system-of-interest SOI

system whose life cycle is under consideration

### 3.1.64 system of systems SoS

set of systems that integrate or interoperate to provide a unique capability that none of the constituent systems can accomplish on its own

Note 1 to entry: Each constituent system is a useful system by itself, having its own management, goals, and resources, but coordinates within the SoS to provide the unique capability of the SoS.

### 3.1.65 systems engineering

interdisciplinary approach governing the total technical and managerial effort required to transform a set of stakeholder needs, expectations, and constraints into a solution and to support that solution throughout its life.

### 3.1.66 task

required, recommended, or permissible action, intended to contribute to the achievement of one or more outcomes of a process

### 3.1.67 technical management

application of technical and administrative resources to plan, organize and control engineering functions

### 3.1.68 trade-off

decision‐making actions that select from various requirements and alternative solutions on the basis of net benefit to the stakeholders

### 3.1.69 traceability

degree to which a relationship can be established among two or more logical entities, especially entities having a predecessor‐successor or master‐subordinate relationship to one another, such as requirements, system elements, verifications, or tasks

EXAMPLE Software features and test cases are typically traced to software requirements.

### 3.1.70 user

individual or group that interacts with a system or benefits from a system during its utilization

Note 1 to entry: The role of user and the role of operator are sometimes vested, simultaneously or sequentially, in the same individual or organization.

[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 25010:2011, modified, Note 1 to entry added.]

### 3.1.71 validation

confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence, that the requirements for a specific intended use or application have been fulfilled

Note 1 to entry: A system is able to accomplish its intended use, goals and objectives (i.e., meet stakeholder requirements) in the intended operational environment. The right system was built.

Note 2 to entry: In a life cycle context, validation involves the set of activities for gaining confidence that a system is able to accomplish its intended use, goals and objectives in an environment like the operational environment.

### 3.1.72 verification

confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence, that specified requirements have been fulfilled

Note 1 to entry: Verification is a set of activities that compares a system or system element against the required characteristics. This includes, but is not limited to specified requirements, design, descriptions, and the system itself. The system was built right.

[SOURCE: ISO 9000:2015, modified, Note 1 to entry added.]

## 3.2 Abbreviated terms

CCB     Configuration Control Board

CM      Configuration Management

COTS    Commercial‐Off‐The‐Shelf

FCA     Functional Configuration Audit

FOSS    Free and Open Source Software

GUI     Graphical User Interface

NDI     Non‐Developmental Items

QA      Quality Assurance

PCA     Physical Configuration Audit

PESTEL  Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental, and Legal

PMI     Project Management Institute

PMP     Project Management Plan

PRM     Process Reference Model

SCM     Software Configuration Management

SDP     Software Development Plan

SEMP    Systems Engineering Management Plan

SOI     System‐of‐Interest

SoS     System of Systems

SWOT    Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats

WBS     Work Breakdown Structure
