# 4 Conformance

## 4.1 Intended usage

The requirements in this document are contained in Clause 6 and Annex A. This document provides requirements for a number of processes suitable for usage during the life cycle of a software system or product. It is recognized that particular projects or organizations may not need to use all of the processes provided by this document. Therefore, implementation of this document typically involves selecting and declaring a set of processes suitable to the organization or project. There are two ways that an implementation can be claimed to conform to the provisions of this document — full conformance and tailored conformance.

There are two criteria for claiming full conformance. Achieving either criterion suffices for conformance, although the chosen criterion (or criteria) shall be stated in the claim. Claiming “full conformance to tasks” asserts that all of the requirements of the activities and tasks of the declared set of processes are achieved. Alternatively, claiming “full conformance to outcomes” asserts that all of the required outcomes of the declared set of processes are achieved. Full conformance to outcomes permits greater freedom in the implementation of conforming processes and can be useful for implementing processes to be used in the context of an innovative life cycle model.

NOTE 1 Options for conformance are provided for needed flexibility in the application of this document. Each process has a set of objectives (phrased as “outcomes”) and a set of activities and tasks that represent one way to achieve the objectives.

NOTE 2 Users who implement the activities and tasks of the declared set of processes can assert full conformance to tasks of the selected processes. Some users, however, might have innovative process variants that achieve the objectives (i.e., the outcomes) of the declared set of processes without implementing all of the activities and tasks. These users can assert full conformance to the outcomes of the declared set of processes. The two criteria — conformance to task and conformance to outcome — are necessarily not equivalent since specific performance of activities and tasks can require, in some cases, a higher level of capability than just the achievement of outcomes.

NOTE 3 When this document is used to help develop an agreement between an acquirer and a supplier, clauses of this document can be selected for incorporation in the agreement with or without modification. In this case, it is more appropriate for the acquirer and supplier to claim compliance with the agreement than conformance with this document.

NOTE 4 An organization (for example, national, industrial association, company) imposing this document, as a condition of trade, can specify and make public the minimum set of required processes, outcomes, activities, and tasks, which constitute suppliers’ compliance with the conditions of trade.

NOTE 5 Requirements of this document are marked by the use of the verb “shall”. Recommendations are marked by the use of the verb “should". Permissions are marked by the use of the verb “may”. However, despite the verb that is used, the requirements for conformance are selected as described previously.

## 4.2 Full conformance

### 4.2.1 Full conformance to outcomes

A claim of full conformance declares the set of processes for which conformance is claimed. Full conformance to outcomes is achieved by demonstrating that all of the outcomes of the declared set of processes have been achieved. In this situation, the provisions for activities and tasks of the declared set of processes are guidance rather than requirements, regardless of the verb form that is used in the provision.

One intended use of this document is to facilitate process assessment and improvement. For this purpose, the objectives of each process are written in the form of ‘outcomes’ compatible with the provisions of ISO/IEC 33002. That standard provides for the assessment of the processes of this document, providing a basis for improvement. Users intending process assessment and improvement may use the process outcomes written in this document as the “process reference model” required by ISO/IEC 33002.

### 4.2.2 Full conformance to tasks

A claim of full conformance declares the set of processes for which conformance is claimed. Full conformance to tasks is achieved by demonstrating that all of the requirements of the activities and tasks of the declared set of processes have been achieved. In this situation, the provisions for the outcomes of the declared set of processes are guidance rather than requirements, regardless of the verb form that is used in the provision.

NOTE A claim of full conformance to tasks can be appropriate in contractual situations where an acquirer or a regulator requires detailed understanding of the suppliers’ processes.

## 4.3 Tailored conformance

When this document is used as a basis for establishing a set of processes that do not qualify for full conformance, the clauses of this document are selected or modified in accordance with the tailoring process prescribed in Annex A. The tailored text, for which tailored conformance is claimed, is declared. Tailored conformance is achieved by demonstrating that the outcomes, activities, and tasks, as tailored, have been achieved.
