# 6 Software life cycle processes

## 6.1 Agreement processes

This subclause specifies the requirements for the establishment of agreements with organizational entities external and internal to the organization.

The Agreement processes consist of the following:
a) Acquisition process – used by organizations for acquiring products or services; and
b) Supply process – used by organizations for supplying products or services.

These processes define the activities necessary to establish an agreement between two organizations. If the Acquisition process is invoked, it provides the means for conducting business with a supplier. This may include products that are supplied for use as an operational software system, services in support of operational activities, software elements of a system, or elements of a software system being provided by a supplier. If the Supply process is invoked, it provides the means for an agreement in which the result is a product or service that is provided to the acquirer.

NOTE Security is an increasing concern in systems and software engineering. See ISO/IEC 27036, Security techniques - Information security for supplier relationships, for requirements and guidance for suppliers and acquirers on how to secure information in supplier relationships. Specific aspects of information security supplier relationships are addressed in ISO/IEC 27036‐3:2013 and ISO/IEC 27036‐4 (in development).

### 6.1.1 Acquisition process

#### 6.1.1.1 Purpose

    The purpose of the Acquisition process is to obtain a product or service in accordance with the acquirer’s requirements.

NOTE As part of this process, the agreement is modified when a change request affecting the terms of the agreement is agreed to by both the acquirer and supplier.

#### 6.1.1.2 Outcomes

As a result of the successful implementation of the Acquisition process:
a) A request for supply is prepared.
b) One or more suppliers are selected.
c) An agreement is established between the acquirer and supplier.
d) A product or service complying with the agreement is accepted.
e) Acquirer obligations defined in the agreement are satisfied.

#### 6.1.1.3 Activities and tasks

The acquirer shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Acquisition process.

NOTE 1 The activities and resulting agreement from this process often apply to suppliers in the supply chain, including subcontracted suppliers.

NOTE 2 IEEE Std 1062‐2015, IEEE Recommended Practice for Software Acquisition, contains detailed activities for software acquisition alternatives, including custom‐developed, off‐the‐shelf, and software as a service. IEEE Std 1062‐2015 also provides software acquisition guidance for technical data rights and intellectual property considerations, for consideration when safety assurance or information security requirements are of concern, and checklists of relevant issues for organizational consideration when establishing software acquisition processes.

a) Prepare for the acquisition. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Define a strategy for how the acquisition will be conducted.

NOTE 1 This strategy describes or references the life cycle model, risks and issues mitigation, a schedule of milestones, and selection criteria if the supplier is external to the acquiring organization. It also includes key drivers and characteristics of the acquisition, such as responsibilities and liabilities; specific models, methods, or processes; level of criticality; formality; and priority of relevant trade factors.

NOTE 2 The Decision Management process and System Analysis process are often used to support trade‐offs for the acquisition strategy. Examples include: determining a make or buy decision, as well as the suitability of specific COTS or modified OTS solutions and supplier evaluation.

NOTE 3 If the strategy calls for acquisition of specific commercial‐off‐the‐shelf software or open source software, acquisition can be limited to identifying the supplier, accepting or negotiating the conditions in a pre‐defined license or lease or maintenance agreement, determining rights to intellectual property and data rights in the software system, and agreeing on the price.

NOTE 4 A factor to consider in agreements between suppliers is data rights and lateral access to constituent data and intellectual property. As an example, suppliers for one system component may need to collaborate with suppliers for another component and share source code. Agreements can enable this collaboration.

2) Prepare a request for the supply of a product or service that includes the requirements.

NOTE 1 If a supplier is external to the organization, then the request includes the business practices with which a supplier is expected to comply and the criteria for selecting a supplier.

NOTE 2 A definition of requirements is provided to one or more suppliers. The requirements are the stakeholder or the system/software requirements, depending on the type of acquisition approach, and using the associated requirements definition process.

NOTE 3 The acquirer develops the requirements by itself or retains a supplier to develop them. If the acquirer retains a supplier to develop requirements, the acquirer retains approval authority for the requirements developed by the supplier.

b) Advertise the acquisition and select the supplier. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Communicate the request for the supply of a product or service to potential suppliers; and

2) Select one or more suppliers.

NOTE To obtain competitive solicitations, proposals to supply are evaluated and compared against the selection criteria and ranked. The justification for rating each proposal is declared and suppliers commonly are informed why they were or were not selected.

c) Establish and maintain an agreement. This activity consists of the following tasks:

NOTE Project cost, schedule, and performance are monitored through the Project Assessment and Control process. Any identified issues that require agreement modifications are referred to this activity. Any proposals for changes to system elements or information are controlled through the Change Management activity of the Configuration Management process.

1) Develop an agreement with the supplier that includes acceptance criteria.

NOTE 1 This agreement ranges in formality from a written contract to a verbal agreement. Appropriate to the level of formality, the agreement establishes requirements, development and delivery milestones, verification, validation and acceptance conditions, exception‐handling procedures, agreement change management procedures, and payment schedules, so that both parties of the agreement understand the basis for executing the agreement. Other provisions for agreements include rights and restrictions associated with technical data and intellectual property, acceptance test preparation and test environment details; and the extent of supplier involvement. The agreement identifies process requirements that need to be imposed on participating subcontractors, such as configuration management requirements, reporting of risks, and reporting of measures and measurement analysis.

NOTE 2 Acceptance criteria, such as acceptance testing, relate to how the product or service will satisfy its intended use in its operational environment. Acceptance testing can be performed using the Validation process. Exceptions that arise during the conduct of the agreement or with the delivered product or service are resolved according to the procedures established in the agreement.

2) Identify necessary changes to the agreement.

NOTE In requesting a change to the agreement, the acquirer or the supplier details its specifications, rationale, and background.

3) Evaluate impact of changes on the agreement.

NOTE Any change is investigated for impacts to project plans, schedule, cost, technical capability, and quality. A change can be handled within the existing agreement, can require a modification to the agreement, or can require a new agreement.

4) Negotiate the agreement with the supplier.

NOTE Agreement terms are negotiated between the acquirer and supplier. Negotiation occurs for the initial agreement, and as required for any changes. Changed agreements are based on the required change and identified impacts. Details are discussed and changed during negotiation, after which the acquirer and supplier accept the terms of an agreement and the agreement commences. For a written contract, this occurs when the contract is signed or as specified in the agreement.

5) Update the agreement with the supplier, as necessary.

NOTE 1 The result of the agreement modification is incorporated into the project plans and communicated to all affected parties.

NOTE 2 Agreements can specify the conditions under which the agreement will be terminated by either party, e.g., unexpected changes in strategy or available funding, or lack of satisfactory progress.

d) Monitor the agreement. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Assess the execution of the agreement.

NOTE 1 This includes confirmation that all parties are meeting their responsibilities according to the agreement. The Project Assessment and Control process is used to evaluate projected cost, schedule, performance, and the impact of undesirable outcomes on the organization. This information is combined with other assessments of the execution of the terms of the agreement. If execution of the agreement does not result in an acceptable product or service, the acquirer or supplier can terminate the agreement as allowed in its terms.

NOTE 2 Acceptance testing can be performed using the Validation process. Exceptions that arise during the conduct of the agreement or with the delivered product or service are resolved according to the procedures established in the agreement.

2) Provide data needed by the supplier and resolve issues in a timely manner.

e) Accept the product or service. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Confirm that the delivered product or service complies with the agreement.

NOTE If the agreed requirements are satisfied and the acceptance criteria are met, the supplier has fulfilled its obligation. Unaddressed exceptions, e.g., disputes over conduct of acceptance testing or product suitability for intended use, are a matter for agreement provisions relating to disputes, arbitration or applicable law and regulation.

2) Provide payment or other agreed consideration.

3) Accept the product or service from the supplier, or other party, as directed by the agreement.

4) Close the agreement.

NOTE The project is closed by the Portfolio Management process.

### 6.1.2 Supply process

#### 6.1.2.1 Purpose

    The purpose of the Supply process is to provide an acquirer with a product or service that meets agreed requirements.

NOTE As part of this process, the agreement is modified when a change request affecting the terms of the agreement is agreed to by both the acquirer and supplier.

#### 6.1.2.2 Outcomes
  
As a result of the successful implementation of the Supply process:
a) An acquirer for a product or service is identified.
b) A response to the acquirer’s request is produced.
c) An agreement is established between the acquirer and supplier.
d) A product or service is provided.
e) Supplier obligations defined in the agreement are satisfied.
f) Responsibility for the acquired product or service, as directed by the agreement, is transferred.

#### 6.1.2.3 Activities and tasks

The supplier shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Supply process.

a) Prepare for the supply. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Determine the existence and identity of an acquirer who has a need for a product or service.

NOTE This is often generated through the Business or Mission Analysis process. For a product or service developed for consumers, an agent, e.g., a marketing function within the supplier organization, often represents the acquirer.

2) Define a supply strategy.

NOTE This strategy describes or references the life cycle model, risks and issues mitigation, and a schedule of milestones. It also includes key drivers and characteristics of the acquisition, such as responsibilities and liabilities; specific models, methods, or processes; level of criticality; formality; and priority of relevant trade factors.

b) Respond to a request for supply of products or services. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Evaluate a request for the supply of a product or service) to determine feasibility and how to respond.

2) Prepare a response that satisfies the solicitation.

c) Establish and maintain an agreement. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Negotiate an agreement with the acquirer that includes acceptance criteria.

NOTE This agreement ranges in formality from a written contract to a verbal agreement. The Supplier confirms that the requirements, delivery milestones, and acceptance conditions are achievable, that exception handling and agreement change management procedures and payment schedules are acceptable, and that they establish a basis for executing the agreement without unnecessary risks. Issues are discussed and resolved during negotiation, after which the acquirer and supplier accept the terms of an agreement and the agreement commences. For a contract, this occurs when the contract is signed.

2) Identify necessary changes to the agreement.

NOTE In requesting a change to the agreement, the acquirer or the supplier details its specifications, rationale, and background.

3) Evaluate impact of changes on the agreement.

NOTE Any change is investigated for impacts to project plans, schedule, cost, technical capability, or quality. A change can be handled within the existing agreement, can require a modification to the agreement, or can require a new agreement.

4) Negotiate the agreement with the acquirer, as necessary.

NOTE Changes to agreement terms are negotiated between the supplier and acquirer. This includes changes due to changing market context. Negotiation occurs for the initial agreement, and as required for any changes. Changed agreements are based on the required change and identified impacts.

5) Update the agreement with the acquirer, as necessary.

NOTE The result of the agreement modification is incorporated into the project plans and communicated to all affected parties.

d) Execute the agreement. This activity consists of the following tasks: 

1) Execute the agreement according to the established project plans. NOTE A supplier sometimes adopts, or agrees to use, acquirer processes.

2) Assess the execution of the agreement.

NOTE This includes confirmation that all parties are meeting their responsibilities according to the agreement. The Project Assessment and Control process is used to evaluate projected cost, schedule, performance, and the impact of undesirable outcomes on the organization. The change management activity of the Configuration Management process is used to control changes to the system elements. This information is combined with other assessments of the execution of the terms of the agreement. If execution of the agreement does not result in an acceptable product or service, the acquirer or supplier can terminate the agreement as allowed in its terms.

e) Deliver and support the product or service. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Deliver the product or service in accordance with the agreement criteria.

NOTE As stated in the agreement, acceptance criteria, such as acceptance testing, relate to how the product or service will satisfy its intended use in its operational environment. Unaddressed exceptions, e.g., disputes over conduct of acceptance testing or product suitability for intended use, are a matter for agreement provisions relating to disputes, arbitration or applicable law and regulation.

2) Provide assistance to the acquirer in support of the delivered product or service, per the agreement.

3) Accept and acknowledge payment or other agreed consideration.

4) Transfer the product or service to the acquirer, or other party, as directed by the agreement.

5) Close the agreement.

NOTE 1 The project is closed by the Portfolio Management process.

NOTE 2 Agreements can specify the conditions under which the agreement will be terminated by either party, e.g., unexpected changes in strategy or available funding, or lack of satisfactory progress.

## 6.2 Organizational Project-Enabling processes

The Organizational Project‐Enabling processes help ensure the organization’s capability to acquire and supply products or services through the initiation, support and control of projects. These processes provide resources and infrastructure necessary to support projects and help ensure the satisfaction of organizational objectives and established agreements. They are not intended to be a comprehensive set of business processes that enable strategic management of the organization’s business.

The Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes consist of the following:

a) Life Cycle Model Management process;

b) Infrastructure Management process;

c) Portfolio Management process;

d) Human Resource Management process;

e) Quality Management process; and

f) Knowledge Management process.

### 6.2.1 Life cycle model management process

#### 6.2.1.1 Purpose

    The purpose of the Life Cycle Model Management process is to define, maintain, and assure availability of policies, life cycle processes, life cycle models, and procedures for use by the organization with respect to the scope of this document.

This process provides life cycle policies, processes, models, and procedures that are consistent with the organization’s objectives, that are defined, adapted, improved and maintained to support individual project needs within the context of the organization, and that are capable of being applied using effective, proven methods and tools.

#### 6.2.1.2 Outcomes

As a result of the successful implementation of the Life Cycle Model Management process:
a) Organizational policies and procedures for the management and deployment of life cycle models and processes are established.
b) Responsibility, accountability, and authority within life cycle policies, processes, models, and procedures are defined.
c) Life cycle models and processes for use by the organization are assessed.
d) Prioritized process, model, and procedure improvements are implemented.

#### 6.2.1.3 Activities and tasks

The organization shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Life Cycle Model Management process.

a) Establish the process. This activity consists of the following tasks:

NOTE The detail of the life cycle implementation within a project is dependent upon the complexity of the work, the methods used, and the skills and training of personnel involved in performing the work. A project tailors policies, processes, models, and procedures according to its requirements and needs, while maintaining alignment with regulations and organizational policies. Annex A contains information on tailoring.

1) Establish policies and procedures for process management and deployment that are consistent with organizational strategies.

2) Establish the processes that implement the requirements of this document and that are consistent with organizational strategies.

3) Define the roles, responsibilities, accountabilities, and authorities to facilitate implementation of processes and the strategic management of life cycles.

4) Define business criteria that control progression through the life cycle.

NOTE The decision‐making criteria regarding entering and exiting each life cycle stage and key milestones are established. These are sometimes expressed in terms of business achievement.

5) Establish standard life cycle models for the organization that are comprised of stages and define the purpose and outcomes for each stage.

NOTE The life cycle model comprises one or more stage models, as needed. It is assembled as a sequence of stages that can overlap or iterate, as appropriate for the system‐of‐interest’s scope, magnitude, complexity, changing needs and opportunities. Stages are illustrated in ISO/IEC TS 24748‐1 using a commonly encountered example of life cycle stages. Specific examples for systems and software are provided in ISO/IEC TR 24748‐2 and ISO/IEC TR 24748‐ 3. The life cycle processes and activities are selected, tailored as appropriate and employed in a stage to fulfill the purpose and outcomes of that stage.

b) Assess the process. This activity consists of the following tasks:

NOTE ISO/IEC 33002:2015 provides a more detailed set of process assessment activities and tasks that can be aligned with
the tasks shown below.

1) Monitor process execution across the organization.

NOTE This includes monitoring performance, analyzing process measures, and reviewing trends with respect to compliance with regulations, organizational policies, business criteria, and feedback from the projects regarding the effectiveness and efficiency of the processes.

2) Conduct periodic reviews of the life cycle models used by the projects.
NOTE This includes confirming the continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the life cycle models used by the projects and making improvements as appropriate. This includes the stages, processes and achievement criteria that control progression through the life cycle.

3) Identify improvement opportunities from assessment results.

NOTE Improvements can affect the stages, processes, and achievement criteria that control progression through the life cycle.

c) Improve the process. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Prioritize and plan improvement opportunities.

2) Implement improvement opportunities and inform relevant stakeholders.

NOTE Process Improvement includes improvements to any of the processes in the organization. Lessons learned are captured and available.

### 6.2.2 Infrastructure Management process

#### 6.2.2.1 Purpose

The purpose of the Infrastructure Management process is to provide the infrastructure and services to projects tosupport organization and project objectives throughout the life cycle.

This process defines, provides and maintains the facilities, tools, and communications and information technology assets needed for the organization’s business with respect to the scope of this document.

#### 6.2.2.2 Outcomes

As a result of the successful implementation of the Infrastructure Management process:

a) The requirements for infrastructure are defined.

b) The infrastructure elements are identified and specified.

c) Infrastructure elements are developed or acquired.

d) The infrastructure is available.

#### 6.2.2.3 Activities and tasks

The organization shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Infrastructure Management process.

a) Establish the infrastructure. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Define project infrastructure requirements.

NOTE 1 Infrastructure element examples include facilities, tools, hardware, software, services, and standards. In addition to the general infrastructure resources common to an organization to support its business processes, an organization can also provide projects with unique or shared enabling systems to support the project’s technical processes.

NOTE 2 The infrastructure resource needs for the project are considered in context with other projects and resources within the organization, as well as within the policies and strategic plans of the organization. Business constraints and timelines that influence and control provision of infrastructure resources and services for the project are also evaluated. Project plans and future business needs contribute to the understanding of the resource infrastructure that is required. Physical factors (e.g., facilities), logistics needs, and human factors (including health and safety aspects) are also considered.

NOTE 3 ISO/IEC 27036, Information security for supplier relationships, provides guidance for addressing security of outsourced infrastructure.

2) Identify, obtain and provide infrastructure resources and services that are needed to implement and support projects.

NOTE An inventory asset registry is often established to track infrastructure elements and support reuse of infrastructure assets.

b) Maintain the infrastructure. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Evaluate the degree to which delivered infrastructure resources satisfy project needs.

2) Identify and provide improvements or changes to the infrastructure resources as the project requirements change.

### 6.2.3 Portfolio Management process

#### 6.2.3.1 Purpose

The purpose of the Portfolio Management process is to initiate and sustain necessary, sufficient and suitable projects in order to meet the strategic objectives of the organization.
This process commits the investment of adequate organization funding and resources, and sanctions the authorities needed to establish selected projects. It performs continued assessment of projects to confirm they justify, or can be redirected to justify, continued investment.

For software systems, portfolio management also commonly refers to the management of a product line (portfolio of assets, products, and enabling systems, or service catalogue) to meet organizational or customer needs and objectives and support changes in technology. Management of assets is achieved through management of projects.

#### 6.2.3.2 Outcomes

As a result of the successful implementation of the Portfolio Management process:
a) Business venture opportunities, investments or necessities are qualified and prioritized.
b) Projects are identified.
c) Resources and budgets for each project are allocated.
d) Project management responsibilities, accountability, and authorities are defined.
e) Projects meeting agreement and stakeholder requirements are sustained.
f) Projects not meeting agreement or satisfying stakeholder requirements are redirected or terminated.
g) Projects that have completed agreements and satisfied stakeholder requirements are closed.

#### 6.2.3.3 Activities and tasks

The organization shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Portfolio Management process.

a) Define and authorize projects. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Identify potential new or modified capabilities or missions.

NOTE The organization business strategy, concept of operations, or gap analysis or opportunity analysis is reviewed for current gaps, problems, or opportunities. A new capability or enterprise need is usually determined in the Business or Mission Analysis process, further defined in the Stakeholder Needs and Requirements Definition process, and managed through this process.

2) Prioritize, select and establish new business opportunities, ventures or undertakings.

NOTE These are usually consistent with the business strategy and action plans of the organization. The potential projects are prioritized, and thresholds established, to determine which projects will be executed. The characteristics of identified projects are often determined, including stakeholder value, risks and barriers to success, dependencies and inter‐relationships, constraints, resource needs and mutual contention for resources. Each potential project is then assessed with respect to likelihood of success and cost‐benefit. The Decision Management and System Analysis processes provide details on performing an analysis of alternatives.

3) Define projects, accountabilities and authorities.

4) Identify the expected goals, objectives, and outcomes of each project.

5) Identify and allocate resources for the achievement of project goals and objectives.

6) Identify multi‐project interfaces and dependencies to be managed or supported by each project.

NOTE 1 This includes the use or reuse of enabling systems used by more than one project and the use or reuse of common system elements, including software elements, by more than one project.

NOTE 2 Understanding each project in the context of the enterprise architecture helps to ensure interfaces and constraints are identified.

7) Specify the project reporting requirements and review milestones that govern the execution of each project.

8) Authorize each project to commence execution of project plans.

NOTE Refer to the Project Planning process for additional information on developing project plans. Project plans are most useful when developed and approved early in the project life cycle.

b) Evaluate the portfolio of projects. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Evaluate projects to confirm ongoing viability.

NOTE Viability includes the following criteria:

i) The project is making progress towards achieving established goals and objectives.

ii) The project is complying with project directives.

iii) The project is being conducted according to approved project life cycle policies, processes, and procedures.

iv) The project remains viable, as indicated by, for example, continuing need for the service, practicable product implementation, and acceptable investment benefits.

2) Act to continue or redirect projects that are satisfactorily progressing or can be expected to progress satisfactorily by appropriate redirection.

c) Terminate projects. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Where agreements permit, act to cancel or suspend projects whose disadvantages or risks to the organization outweigh the benefits of continued investments.

NOTE Capture of lessons learned from canceled or failing projects can be especially useful for organizational improvement or use on other projects.

2) After completion of the agreement for products and services, act to close the projects.

NOTE Closure is accomplished in accordance with organizational policies and procedures, and the agreement.

### 6.2.4 Human Resource Management process

#### 6.2.4.1 Purpose

The purpose of the Human Resource Management process is to provide the organization with necessary human resources and to maintain their competencies, consistent with business needs.
This process provides a supply of skilled and experienced personnel qualified to perform life cycle processes to achieve organization, project, and stakeholder objectives.

#### 6.2.4.2 Outcomes

As a result of the successful implementation of the Human Resource Management process:
a) Skills required by projects are identified.
b) Necessary human resources are provided to projects.
c) Skills of personnel are developed, maintained or enhanced.
d) Conflicts in multi‐project resource demands are resolved.

#### 6.2.4.3 Activities and tasks

The organization shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Human Resource Management process:

a) Identify skills. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Identify skill needs based on current and expected projects.

2) Identify and record skills of personnel.

b) Develop skills. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Establish skills development strategy.
NOTE This plan includes types and levels of training, categories of personnel, schedules, personnel resource requirements, and training needs.

2) Obtain or develop training, education or mentoring resources.
NOTE These resources include training materials that are developed by the organization or external parties, training courses that are available from external suppliers, computer based instruction.

3) Provide planned skill development.

4) Maintain records of skill development.

c) Acquire and provide skills. This activity consists of the following tasks:

NOTE This includes the recruitment and retention of personnel with experience levels and skills necessary to properly staff projects; staff assessment and review, e.g., their proficiency, motivation, ability to work in a team environment, as well as the need to be retrained, reassigned or reallocated.

1) Obtain qualified personnel when skill deficits are identified.

NOTE This includes using outsourced resources.

2) Maintain and manage the pool of skilled personnel necessary to staff ongoing projects.

3) Make project assignments based on project and staff‐development needs.

4) Motivate personnel, e.g., through career development and reward mechanisms.

5) Control multi‐project management interfaces to resolve personnel conflicts.

NOTE This includes conflicts of capacity in organizational infrastructure and supporting services and personnel resources among ongoing projects; or from project personnel being over‐committed.

### 6.2.5 Quality Management process

#### 6.2.5.1 Purpose

The purpose of the Quality Management process is to assure that products, services and implementations of the quality management process meet organizational and project quality objectives and achieve customer satisfaction.

#### 6.2.5.2 Outcomes

As a result of the successful implementation of the Quality Management process:

a) Organizational quality management policies, objectives, and procedures are defined and implemented.

b) Quality evaluation criteria and methods are established.

c) Resources and information are provided to projects to support the operation and monitoring of project quality assurance activities.

d) Quality assurance evaluation results are gathered and analyzed.

e) Quality management policies and procedures are improved based upon project and organizational results.

#### 6.2.5.3 Activities and tasks

The organization shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Quality Management process.

NOTE Refer to ISO 9001:2015 for information and requirements to establish a Quality Management System.

a) Plan quality management. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Establish quality management policies, objectives, and procedures. NOTE 1 ISO 9004:2009 contains guidelines for performance improvements.

NOTE 2 The policies, objectives, and procedures are based on the business strategy for customer satisfaction and risk management considerations.

2) Define responsibilities and authority for implementation of quality management.
NOTE Resources for quality management are often assigned from distinct organizations for independence from project management.

3) Define quality evaluation criteria and methods.

4) Provide resources and information for quality management.

b) Evaluate quality management. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Gather and analyze quality assurance evaluation results, in accordance with the defined criteria.

2) Assess customer satisfaction.

NOTE ISO 10004:2012 contains guidelines for monitoring and measuring customer satisfaction. The quality of the software system is also demonstrated by user satisfaction.

3) Conduct periodic reviews of project Quality Assurance activities for compliance with the Quality Management policies, objectives, and procedures.

NOTE Quality evaluation criteria and methods are established. Quality assessments address compliance with the project procedures and product conformance with quality characteristics.

4) Monitor the status of quality improvements on processes, products, and services.

c) Perform corrective and preventive action. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Plan corrective actions when quality management objectives are not achieved.

2) Plan preventive actions when there is a sufficient risk that quality management objectives will not be achieved.

3) Monitor corrective and preventive actions to completion and inform relevant stakeholders.

NOTE 1 Implementation of corrective and preventive action is performed in other relevant processes, such as Life Cycle Model Management or Project Assessment and Control.

NOTE 2 ISO 9001:2015, 0.3.3 and Annex A.4 describe preventive action to eliminate potential nonconformities as part of risk‐based thinking.

### 6.2.6 Knowledge Management process

#### 6.2.6.1 Purpose

The purpose of the Knowledge Management process is to create the capability and assets that enable the organization to exploit opportunities to re‐apply existing knowledge.

This encompasses knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets, including system elements.

NOTE The re‐application of existing knowledge is known as knowledge reuse and includes the reuse of knowledge about or from software elements.

#### 6.2.6.2 Outcomes
  
As a result of the successful implementation of the Knowledge Management process:

a) A taxonomy for the application of knowledge assets is identified.

b) The organizational knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets are developed or acquired.

c) The organizational knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets are available.

d) Knowledge management usage data is gathered and analyzed.

#### 6.2.6.3 Activities and tasks

The organization shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Knowledge Management process:

a) Plan knowledge management. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Define the knowledge management strategy.
NOTE 1 This knowledge management strategy generally includes:

i) Identifying domains and their potential for the reapplication of knowledge.

ii) Plans for obtaining and maintaining knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets for their useful life.

iii) Characterization of the types of knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets to be collected and maintained.

iv) Criteria for accepting, qualifying, and retiring knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets.

v) Procedures for controlling changes to the knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets.

vi) Plans, mechanisms, and procedures for protection, control, and access to classified or sensitive data and information.

vii) Mechanisms for storage and retrieval.

NOTE 2 Knowledge management includes knowledge shared both internally within the organization and knowledge that is shared outside the organization with designated stakeholders, acquirers, and business partners, subject to intellectual property and non‐disclosure agreements.

2) Identify the knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets to be managed.

3) Identify projects that can benefit from the application of the knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets.

b) Share knowledge and skills throughout the organization. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Establish and maintain a classification for capturing and sharing knowledge and skills across the organization.

NOTE This classification can include expert, common, and domain knowledge and skills, as well as lessons learned from other tasks.

2) Capture or acquire knowledge and skills.

3) Share knowledge and skills across the organization.

c) Share knowledge assets throughout the organization. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Establish a taxonomy to organize knowledge assets.

NOTE 1 The taxonomy includes the following:

i) Definition of the boundaries of domains and their relationships to others.

ii) Domain models capturing essential common and different features, capabilities, concepts, and functions.

iii) An architecture for a family of systems within the domain, including their common and different features.

NOTE 2 See ISO/IEC 26550 for more information on product line models. Refer to ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011 for requirements on architecture frameworks, viewpoints, model kinds, views and models.

2) Develop or acquire knowledge assets.

NOTE Knowledge assets include system elements or their representations (e.g., reusable code libraries, reference architectures) architecture or design elements (e.g., architecture or design patterns), processes, criteria, or other technical information (e.g., training materials) related to domain knowledge, and lessons learned.

3) Share knowledge assets across the organization.

NOTE Automated search capabilities improve access to knowledge assets.

d) Manage knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Maintain knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets.

2) Monitor and record the reuse of knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets.

3) Periodically reassess the currency of technology and market needs for the knowledge assets.

NOTE Assess the business benefits which the organization gained through the use of knowledge management practices.

## 6.3 Technical Management processes

The Technical Management processes are used to establish and evolve plans, to execute the plans, to assess actual achievement and progress against the plans, and to control execution through to fulfillment. Individual Technical Management processes may be invoked at any time in the life cycle and at any level in a hierarchy of projects, as required by plans or unforeseen events. The Technical Management processes are applied with a level of rigor and formality that depends on the risk and complexity of the project.

The scope of a technical management process is the technical management of a project or its products, to include the software product or system‐of‐interest.

NOTE This set of Technical Management processes is performed so that software system‐specific technical processes can be conducted effectively. They do not comprise a management system or a comprehensive set of processes for project management, as that is not the scope of this document.

The Technical Management processes consist of the following:

a) Project Planning process;

b) Project Assessment and Control process;

c) Decision Management process;

d) Risk Management process;

e) Configuration Management process;

f) Information Management process;

g) Measurement process; and

h) Quality Assurance process.

Project Planning and Project Assessment and Control processes are key to all management practices. These processes establish the general approach for managing a project or a process. The other processes in this group provide a specific focused set of tasks for achieving a specialized management objective. They are all evident in the management of any undertaking, ranging from a complete organization down to a single life cycle process and its tasks. In this document, the project has been chosen as the context for describing processes. The same processes can also be applied in the performance of services.

### 6.3.1 Project Planning process

#### 6.3.1.1 Purpose

The purpose of the Project Planning process is to produce and coordinate effective and workable plans.

This process determines the scope of the project management and technical activities, identifies process outputs, tasks and deliverables, establishes schedules for task conduct, including achievement criteria, and required resources to accomplish tasks. This is an ongoing process that continues throughout a project, with regular revisions to plans.

NOTE The strategies defined in each of the other processes provide inputs and are integrated in the Project Planning process. The Project Assessment and Control process is used to assess whether the plans are integrated, aligned, and feasible.

#### 6.3.1.2 Outcomes

As a result of the successful implementation of the Project Planning process:
a) Objectives and plans are defined.
b) Roles, responsibilities, accountabilities, and authorities are defined.
c) Resources and services necessary to achieve the objectives are formally requested and committed.
d) Plans for the execution of the project are activated.

#### 6.3.1.3 Activities and tasks

The project shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Project Planning process.

a) Define the project. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Identify the project objectives and constraints.

NOTE 1 Objectives and constraints include performance and other quality aspects, cost, time and customer and user satisfaction. Each objective is identified with a level of detail that permits selection, tailoring and implementation of the appropriate processes and activities.

NOTE 2 ISO/IEC 15026 Systems and software assurance, ISO/IEC 27001 Information Security Management System and ISO/IEC 27036, Information Security for Supplier Relationships, provide additional guidance on objectives and constraints related to assurance and security.

2) Define the project scope as established in the agreement.

NOTE This includes the relevant activities required to satisfy business decision criteria and complete the project successfully. A project can have responsibility for one or more stages in the complete software system life cycle. Project Planning includes defining appropriate actions for maintaining project plans, performing assessments and controlling the project.

3) Define and maintain a life cycle model that is comprised of stages using the defined life cycle models of the organization.

NOTE ISO/IEC TS 24748‐1 provides detailed information regarding life cycle stages and the definition of an appropriate life cycle model. It defines a general set of exemplar system life cycle stages, including Concept, Development, Production, Utilization, Support and Retirement. It also identifies a generic exemplar set of software life cycle stages, including Needs determination, Concept exploration and definition, Demonstration and evaluation, Engineering/development, Production/manufacturing, Deployment/sales, Operations, Maintenance and support, and Retirement.

4) Establish a work breakdown structure (WBS) based on the deliverable products or the evolving architecture of the software system.

NOTE 1 Each element of the software system architecture, and appropriate processes and activities, are described with a level of detail that is consistent with identified risks. Related tasks in the work breakdown structure are grouped for performance. Project tasks identify work items being developed or produced. The Practice Management Standard for Work Breakdown Structures of the Project Management Institute (PMI) contains additional details on WBSs.

NOTE 2 For projects with agile or iterative methods, a WBS element can correspond to the primary features, from a user perspective, to be produced during iterations.

5) Define and maintain the processes that will be applied on the project.

NOTE 1 These processes are based on the defined processes of the organization (see Life Cycle Model Management process). Annex A contains information on tailoring that can be used to address project‐specific needs. The definition of the processes includes the entry and exit criteria, inputs, process sequence constraints (predecessor/successor relationships), process concurrency requirements (what processes and tasks are to be worked concurrently with other process area tasks or activities), Measures of Effectiveness/Measures of Performance attributes, and scope and cost parameters (for critically important cost estimation).

NOTE2 Identifying interfaces with other projects or organizational units is addressed through the Portfolio Management process.

b) Plan project and technical management. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Define and maintain a project schedule based on management and technical objectives and work estimates.

NOTE This includes definition of the duration, relationship, dependencies and sequence of activities, achievement milestones, resources employed and the reviews and schedule reserves for risk management necessary to achieve timely completion of the project.

2) Define achievement criteria for the life cycle stage decision gates, delivery dates and major dependencies on external inputs or outputs.

NOTE The time intervals between internal reviews are defined in accordance with organizational policy on issues such as business and system criticality, schedule and technical risks.

3) Define the costs and plan a budget.

NOTE Budgeted costs are based on the schedule, software size and complexity estimates, labor estimates, infrastructure costs, procurement items, acquired service and enabling system estimates, and budget reserves for risk management.

4) Define roles, responsibilities, accountabilities, and authorities.

NOTE This includes defining the project organization, staff acquisitions, and the development of staff skills. Authorities include, as appropriate, the legally responsible roles and individuals, e.g., design authorization, safety authorization, and those responsible for applicable certifications or accreditations.

5) Define the infrastructure and services required.

NOTE This includes defining the capacity needed, its availability and its allocation to project tasks. Infrastructure includes facilities, services, tools, communications, and information technology assets. The requirements for enabling systems and services for each life cycle stage are also specified.

6) Plan the acquisition of materials and enabling systems and services supplied from outside the project.

NOTE 1 This includes, as necessary, plans for solicitation, supplier selection, acceptance, contract administration and contract closure. The agreement processes are used for the planned acquisitions.

NOTE2 ISO/IEC 27036, Information security for supplier relationships, provides guidance for acquisition of infrastructure and services.

7) Generate and communicate a plan for project and technical management and execution, including reviews.

NOTE 1 Technical planning for the software system is often captured in a Systems Engineering Management Plan (SEMP) or a Software Engineering Management Plan or a Software Development Plan (SDP). ISO/IEC/IEEE 24748‐5 provides more detail on software engineering technical management planning and includes an annotated outline for an SDP. Planning for the project is often captured in a Project Management Plan. ISO/IEC/IEEE 16326 provides more detail on project planning.

NOTE 2 The strategy activities and tasks from each of the other processes provide inputs and are integrated in the Project Planning process. The Project Assessment and Control process is used to help ensure that the plans are integrated, aligned, and feasible.

c) Activate the project. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Obtain approval to start the project.

NOTE Approval to start (authorization to proceed) is provided through the Portfolio Management process. 

2) Submit requests and obtain commitments for necessary resources to perform the project. NOTE This includes access to enabling systems or services.

3) Implement project plans.

### 6.3.2 Project assessment and control process

#### 6.3.2.1 Purpose

The purpose of the Project Assessment and Control process is to assess if the plans are aligned and feasible; determine the status of the project, technical and process performance; and direct execution to help ensure that the performance is according to plans and schedules, within projected budgets, to satisfy technical objectives.

This process evaluates, periodically and at major events, the progress and achievements against requirements, plans and overall business objectives. Information is provided for management action when significant variances are detected. This process also includes redirecting the project activities and tasks, as appropriate, to correct identified deviations and variations from other technical management or technical processes. Redirection may include re‐planning as appropriate.

#### 6.3.2.2 Outcomes

As a result of the successful implementation of the Project Assessment and Control process:

a) Performance measures or assessment results are available.

b) Adequacy of roles, responsibilities, accountabilities, and authorities is assessed.

c) Adequacy of resources is assessed.

d) Technical progress reviews are performed.

e) Deviations in project performance from plans are investigated and analyzed.

f) Affected stakeholders are informed of project status.

g) Corrective action is defined and directed, when project achievement is not meeting targets.

h) Project replanning is initiated, as necessary.

i) Project action to progress (or not) from one scheduled milestone or event to the next is authorized.

j) Project objectives are achieved.

#### 6.3.2.3 Activities and tasks

The project shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Project Assessment and Control process.

a) Plan for project assessment and control. This activity consists of the following task:

1) Define the project assessment and control strategy.

NOTE The strategy identifies the expected Project Assessment and Control activities, including planned assessment methods and timeframes, and necessary management and technical reviews.

b) Assess the project. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Assess alignment of project objectives and plans with the project context.

2) Assess management and technical plans against objectives to determine adequacy and feasibility.

3) Assess project and technical status against appropriate plans to determine actual and projected cost, schedule, and performance variances.

4) Assess the adequacy of roles, responsibilities, accountabilities, and authorities.

NOTE This includes assessment of the adequacy of personnel competencies to perform project roles and accomplish project tasks. Objective measures are used wherever possible, e.g., efficiency of resource use, project achievement.

5) Assess the adequacy and availability of resources.

NOTE Resources include infrastructure, personnel, funding, time, or other pertinent items. This task includes evaluating the reuse of existing processes and infrastructure resources, and confirming that intra‐organizational commitments are satisfied.

6) Assess progress using measured achievement and milestone completion.

NOTE This includes collecting and evaluating data for labor, material, service costs, and technical performance, as well as other technical data about objectives, such as affordability. These are compared against measures of achievement. This includes conducting effectiveness assessments to determine the adequacy of the evolving software system against requirements. It also includes the readiness of enabling systems to deliver their services when needed.

7) Conduct required management and technical reviews, audits and inspections.

NOTE These are formal or informal, and are conducted to determine readiness to proceed to the next stage of the life cycle or project milestone, to help ensure that project and technical objectives are being met, or to obtain feedback from stakeholders.

8) Monitor critical processes and new technologies.

NOTE This includes identifying and evaluating technology maturity and feasibility of technology insertion. Technology maturity is the readiness of a technology for operational use, and is often measured on a scale from low (exists as a concept only) to high (proven in operational use).

9) Analyze measurement results and make recommendations.

NOTE Measurement results are analyzed to identify deviations, variations or undesirable trends from planned values that include potential concerns, and to make appropriate recommendations for corrections or preventive actions. This includes, where appropriate, statistical analysis of measures that indicates trends, e.g., fault density to indicate quality of outputs, distribution of measured parameters that indicate process repeatability.

10) Record and provide status and findings from assessment tasks.

NOTE These are generally designated in the agreement, policies and procedures. 11) Monitor process execution within the project.

NOTE This includes the analysis of process measures and review of trends with respect to project objectives. Any improvement actions identified can be handled through the Quality Assurance process, the Quality Management process, or the Life Cycle Model Management process.

c) Control the project. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Initiate necessary actions needed to address identified issues.

NOTE1 This task occurs when project or technical achievement is not meeting planned targets. This includes preventive, corrective, and problem resolution actions. Actions generally require replanning or reassignment of personnel, tools and infrastructure assets when inadequacy or unavailability has been detected, or when project or technical achievement exceeds targets or plan. They often impact the cost, schedule, or technical scope or definition. Actions sometimes require changes to the implementation and execution of the life cycle processes.

NOTE 2 Actions are recorded and reviewed to confirm their adequacy and timeliness.

2) Initiate necessary project replanning.

NOTE1 Project replanning is initiated when project objectives or constraints have changed, or when planning assumptions are shown to be invalid.

NOTE 2 Any change that requires a change to the agreement between acquirer and supplier invokes the Acquisition and Supply processes.

3) Initiate change actions when there is a contractual change to cost, time or quality due to the impact of an acquirer or supplier request.

NOTE This includes consideration of modified terms and conditions for supply or initiating new supplier selection, which invokes the Acquisition and Supply processes.

4) Authorize the project to proceed toward the next milestone or event, if justified.

NOTE The Project Assessment and Control process is used to reach agreement on milestone completion.

### 6.3.3 Decision Management process

#### 6.3.3.1 Purpose

The purpose of the Decision Management process is to provide a structured, analytical framework for objectively identifying, characterizing and evaluating a set of alternatives for a decision at any point in the life cycle and select the most beneficial course of action.

This process is used to resolve technical or project issues and respond to requests for decisions encountered during the software life cycle, in order to identify the alternative(s) that provides the preferred outcomes for the situation. The methods most frequently used for Decision Management are the trade study and engineering analysis. Each of the alternatives is assessed against the decision criteria (e.g., cost impact, schedule impact, programmatic constraints, regulatory implications, technical performance characteristics, critical quality characteristics, and risk). Results of these comparisons are ranked, via a suitable selection model, and are then used to decide on an optimal solution. Key study data (e.g., assumptions and decision rationale) are typically maintained to inform decision‐makers and support future decision‐making.

NOTE When it is necessary to perform a detailed assessment of a parameter for one of the criteria, the System Analysis process can be employed to perform the assessment.

#### 6.3.3.2 Outcomes

As a result of the successful implementation of the Decision Management process:

a) Decisions requiring alternative analysis are identified.

b) Alternative courses of action are identified and evaluated.

c) A preferred course of action is selected.

d) The resolution, decision rationale and assumptions are identified.

#### 6.3.3.3 Activities and tasks

The project shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Decision Management process.

a) Prepare for decisions. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Define a decision management strategy.

NOTE A decision management strategy includes the identification of roles, responsibilities, accountabilities, and authorities. The strategy considers the need for obtaining information input and for returning a timely decision. It includes the identification of decision categories and a prioritization scheme. Decisions often arise as a result of an effectiveness assessment, a technical trade‐off, a problem needing to be solved, an action needed as a response to risk exceeding the acceptable threshold, or a new opportunity or approval for project progression to the next life cycle stage. Organization or project guidelines determine the degree of rigor and formality to apply to the decision analysis.

2) Identify the circumstances and need for a decision.

NOTE Problems or opportunities and the alternative courses of action that will resolve their outcome are recorded, categorized and reported.

3) Involve relevant stakeholders in the decision‐making in order to draw on experience and knowledge.

NOTE It is good practice to identify the subject matter expertise needed for the analysis and the decision.

b) Analyze the decision information. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Select and declare the decision management strategy for each decision.

NOTE The degree of rigor required to resolve these problems or opportunities is determined, as well as the data and system analysis needed for evaluating the alternatives. Define the timeframe to reach a decision.

2) Determine desired outcomes and measurable selection criteria.

NOTE The desired value for quantifiable criteria and the threshold value(s) beyond which the attribute will be unsatisfactory are determined, as well as weighting factors for the criteria.

3) Identify the trade space and alternatives.

NOTE If a large number of alternatives exist, they are qualitatively screened to reduce alternatives to a manageable number for further detailed systems analysis. This screening is often based on qualitative assessments of such factors as risk, cost, schedule, and regulatory impacts.

4) Evaluate each alternative against the criteria.

NOTE The System Analysis process is used, as necessary, to quantify specific criteria for each trade alternative to be evaluated. This includes new design parameters, different architecture characteristics, and range of values for critical quality characteristics. The System Analysis process assesses the range of parameter variations in order to obtain a sensitivity analysis for each of the trade alternatives evaluated. These results are used to establish the feasibility of the various trade alternatives.

c) Make and manage decisions. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Determine preferred alternative for each decision.

NOTE Alternatives are evaluated quantitatively, using the selection criteria. The selected alternative generally provides an optimization of, or improvement in, an identified decision.

2) Record the resolution, decision rationale, and assumptions.

3) Record, track, evaluate and report decisions.

NOTE 1 This includes records of problems and opportunities and their disposition, as stipulated in agreements or organizational procedures and in a manner that permits auditing and learning from experience.

NOTE 2 This allows the organization to confirm that problems have been effectively resolved, that adverse trends have been reversed, and that advantage has been taken of opportunities.

### 6.3.4 Risk Management process

#### 6.3.4.1 Purpose

The purpose of the Risk Management process is to identify, analyze, treat and monitor the risks continually.

The Risk Management process is a continual process for systematically addressing risk throughout the life cycle of a system product or service. It can be applied to risks related to the acquisition, development, maintenance or operation of a system.

NOTE Risk is defined in ISO Guide 73:2009 as “The effect of uncertainty on objectives”. This has an attached Note 1, “An effect is a deviation from the expected — positive and/or negative”. A positive risk is commonly known as an opportunity, and can be addressed within the Risk Management process.

#### 6.3.4.2 Outcomes
  
As a result of the successful implementation of the Risk Management process: 

a) Risks are identified.

b) Risks are analyzed.

c) Risk treatment options are identified, prioritized, and selected.

d) Appropriate treatment is implemented.

e) Risks are evaluated to assess changes in status and progress in treatment.

#### 6.3.4.3 Activities and tasks

The project shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Risk Management process.

NOTE ISO/IEC/IEEE 16085 provides a more detailed set of risk management activities and tasks. This risk management process is aligned with ISO 31000:2009 Risk management — Principles and Guidelines, and ISO Guide 73:2009, Risk management — Vocabulary. ISO 9001:2015 describes planning for risks and opportunities in 6.1.

a) Plan risk management. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Define the risk management strategy.

NOTE This includes the risk management process of supply chain suppliers and describes how risks from suppliers will be raised to the next level(s) for incorporation in the project risk process.

2) Define and record the context of the Risk Management process.

NOTE 1 This includes a description of stakeholders’ perspectives, risk categories, and a description (perhaps by reference) of the technical and managerial objectives, assumptions and constraints. The risk categories include the relevant technical areas of the software system and facilitate identification of risks across the product life cycle. As noted in ISO 31000, the aim of this step is to generate a comprehensive list of risks based on those events that might create, enhance, prevent, degrade, accelerate, or delay the achievement of objectives.

NOTE 2 Opportunities, which are one type of risk, provide potential benefits for the software system or project. Each of the opportunities pursued has associated risks that detract from the expected benefit. This includes the risks associated with not pursuing an opportunity, as well as the risk of not achieving the effects of the opportunity.

b) Manage the risk profile. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Define and record the risk thresholds and conditions under which a level of risk may be accepted.

2) Establish and maintain a risk profile.

NOTE The risk profile records: the risk management context; a record of each risk’s state including its likelihood of occurrence, consequences, and risk thresholds; the priority of each risk based on risk criteria supplied by the stakeholders; and the risk action requests along with the status of their treatment. The risk profile is updated when there are changes in an individual risk’s state. The priority in the risk profile is used to determine the application of resources for treatment.

3) Periodically provide the relevant risk profile to stakeholders based upon their needs. 

c) Analyze risks. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Identify risks in the categories described in the risk management context.

NOTE Risks are commonly identified through various analyzes, such as safety, reliability, security, and performance analyzes; technology, architecture, and readiness assessments; and trade studies. These risks are often identified early in the life cycle and continue into the utilization, support, and retirement of the software system. Additionally, risks are often identified through the analysis of measurements of the evolving software system.

2) Estimate the likelihood of occurrence and consequences of each identified risk. 

NOTE Consequences of a risk typically involve technical, schedule, cost, or quality impacts.

3) Evaluate each risk against its risk thresholds.

4) For each risk that does not meet its risk threshold, define and record recommended treatment strategies and measures.

NOTE Risk treatment strategies include, but are not limited to, eliminating the risk, reducing its likelihood of occurrence or severity of consequence, or accepting the risk. Treatments also include taking or increasing risk in order to pursue an opportunity. Measures provide information about the effectiveness of the treatment alternatives.

d) Treat risks. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Identify recommended alternatives for risk treatment.

2) Implement risk treatment alternatives for which the stakeholders determine that actions should be taken to make a risk acceptable.

3) When the stakeholders accept a risk that does not meet its threshold, consider it a high priority and monitor it continually to determine if future risk treatment actions are necessary or if its priority has changed.

4) Once a risk treatment is selected, coordinate management action.

NOTE The Project Assessment and Control process can be applied. e) Monitor risks. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Continually monitor risks and the risk management context for changes and evaluate the risks when their state has changed.

2) Implement and monitor measures to evaluate the effectiveness of risk treatments.

3) Continually monitor for the emergence of new risks and sources throughout the life cycle.

### 6.3.5 Configuration Management process

#### 6.3.5.1 Purpose

The purpose of Configuration Management is to manage and control system elements and configurations over the life cycle. Configuration Management (CM) also manages consistency between a product and its associated configuration definition.

Software configuration management (SCM) applies to both the software system and its interfaces. The purpose of interface management is to agree with interface partners on the exchange of data through communications among software systems and services. Annex E (see E.5) provides an example of an Interface Management Process View.

Software configurations are changed through the controlled release of a new version. The purpose of a release is to authorize and effect the availability of a software feature, function, or system for a specific purpose, with or without restrictions to a subset of users.

#### 6.3.5.2 Outcomes
  
As a result of the successful implementation of the Configuration Management process:

a) Items requiring configuration management are identified and managed.

b) Configuration baselines are established.

c) Changes to items under configuration management are controlled.

d) Configuration status information is available.

e) Required configuration audits are completed.

f) System releases and deliveries are controlled and approved.

#### 6.3.5.3 Activities and tasks

The project shall implement the following activities and tasks in accordance with applicable organization policies and procedures with respect to the Configuration Management process.

NOTE ISO/IEC/IEEE 19770 provides procedures and requirements for an IT asset management system.

a) Plan configuration management. This activity consists of the following tasks:

1) Define a configuration management strategy, including approaches for the following:

i) Governance of CM, including roles, responsibilities, accountabilities, and authorities, and use of configuration control (change control) boards; and

ii) Consideration of the level of risk and impact in approval of configuration baselines and regular and emergency change requests.

NOTE Regularly scheduled changes to apply software patches using approved procedures or check‐in and check‐out of unit‐tested software elements under development are typically performed automatically, or reviewed and approved daily as a matter of routine. In comparison, significant changes to the software system design with major impact on project cost and schedule can involve extensive analyzes, consultations with suppliers, stakeholder reviews, and approvals at the highest levels of the organization.

iii) Coordination of CM across the set of acquirer, supplier, and supply chain organizations for the life of the software system, or the extent of the agreement or project, as appropriate.

iv) Control of access and changes to and disposition of configuration items.

v) The necessary baselines to be established, including criteria or events for commencing configuration control and maintaining baselines of evolving configurations.

vi) Control of software licenses, data rights, and other intellectual property assets.

vii) Frequency, priorities, and content of software versions and releases.
viii) The audit strategy and the responsibilities for validating continuous integrity and security of the configuration definition information.
ix) Change management, including preparing stakeholders and especially users for changes in operational software systems and services.

NOTE 1 For complex software systems, trade‐off studies are performed, e.g., to select an appropriate automated tool to support SCM needs and scope as identified in the strategy.

NOTE 2 Additional guidance regarding configuration management activities can be found in ISO 10007, IEEE Std 828, and SAE ANSI/EIA‐649‐B.

NOTE 3 The SWEBOK, Guide to the Software Engineering Body of Knowledge, provides detailed discussion on SCM. This knowledge area addresses SCM in the context of a system, SCM project and process planning, SCM plan and outline, tool selection, subcontractor control, surveillance and other audits, software configuration items and relationships, software libraries, and Configuration Management process activities.

NOTE 4 The SCM strategy is commonly documented in a plan, e.g., a configuration management plan, or sometimes in a project’s SEMP, SDP, or Project Management Plan (PMP). The strategy planning for Configuration Management is coordinated through the Project Planning process. In establishing points to establish baselines and conduct audits, CM planning is aligned with the software life cycle. The frequency of recurring SCM activities aligns with the iteration of technical processes and stages. SCM planning typically includes deciding when to review Configuration Management planning, what conditions require updating the CM plan, and who is authorized to change the CM plans and items held in configuration control.