# Foreword

ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) and IEC (the International Electrotechnical Commission) form the specialized system for worldwide standardization. National bodies that are members of ISO or IEC participate in the development of International Standards through technical committees established by the respective organization to deal with particular fields of technical activity.
ISO and IEC technical committees collaborate in fields of mutual interest.
Other international organizations, governmental and non‐governmental, in liaison with ISO and IEC, also take part in the work. In the field of information technology, ISO and IEC have established a joint technical committee, ISO/IEC JTC 1.

IEEE Standards documents are developed within the IEEE Societies and the Standards Coordinating Committees of the IEEE Standards Association (IEEE‐SA) Standards Board.
The IEEE develops its standards through a consensus development process, approved by the American National Standards Institute, which brings together volunteers representing varied viewpoints and interests to achieve the final product.
Volunteers are not necessarily members of the Institute and serve without compensation.
While the IEEE administers the process and establishes rules to promote fairness in the consensus development process, the IEEE does not independently evaluate, test, or verify the accuracy of any of the information contained in its standards.

The procedures used to develop this document and those intended for its further maintenance are described in the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1. In particular, the different approval criteria needed for the different types of document should be noted.
This document was drafted in accordance with the editorial rules of the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2 (see www.iso.org/directives).

Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be the subject of patent rights.
ISO, IEC, and IEEE shall not be held responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights.
Details of any patent rights identified during the development of the document will be in the Introduction and/or on the ISO list of patent declarations received (see www.iso.org/patents).

Any trade name used in this document is information given for the convenience of users and does not constitute an endorsement.

For an explanation on the meaning of ISO specific terms and expressions related to conformity assessment, as well as information about ISO’s adherence to the World Trade Organization (WTO) principles in the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) see the following URL <www.iso.org/iso/foreword.html>.

This document was prepared by Joint Technical Committee ISO/IEC JTC 1, Information technology, Subcommittee SC 7, Systems and software engineering, in cooperation with the IEEE Computer Society Systems and Software Engineering Standards Committee, under the Partner Standards Development Organization cooperation agreement between ISO and IEEE.

This first edition of ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207 cancels and replaces ISO/IEC 12207:2008 (second edition), which has been technically revised.

Changes in this revision of ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207 were developed in conjunction with a corresponding revision of ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015, Systems and software engineering – System life cycle processes.
The purpose of these revisions is to accomplish the harmonization of the structures and contents of the two documents, while supporting the requirements of the engineering and assessment communities.

This document was developed with the following goals:
— provide a common terminology between the revision of ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 and ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207;
— where applicable, provide common process names and process structure between the revision of ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 and ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207; and
— enable the user community to evolve towards fully harmonized standards, while allowing backward compatibility.

This revision is intended to achieve a fully harmonized view of the system and software life cycle processes.
