# Introduction

The complexity of software systems has increased to an unprecedented level.
This has led to new opportunities, but also to increased challenges for the organizations that create and utilize systems.
These challenges exist throughout the life cycle of a system and at all levels of architectural detail.
This document provides a common process framework for describing the life cycle of systems created by humans, adopting a Software Engineering approach.
Software Engineering is an interdisciplinary approach and means to enable the realization of successful software systems.
It focuses on defining stakeholder needs and required functionality early in the development cycle, documenting requirements, and performing design synthesis and system validation while considering the complete problem.
It integrates all the disciplines and specialty groups into a team effort forming a structured development process that proceeds from concept to production to operation and maintenance.
It considers both the business and the technical needs of all stakeholders with the goal of providing a quality product that meets the needs of users and other applicable stakeholders.
This life cycle spans the conception of ideas through to the retirement of a system.
It provides the processes for acquiring and supplying systems.
It helps to improve communication and cooperation among the parties that create, utilize and manage modern software systems in order that they can work in an integrated, coherent fashion.
In addition, this framework provides for the assessment and improvement of the life cycle processes.

The processes in this document form a comprehensive set from which an organization can construct software life cycle models appropriate to its products and services.
An organization, depending on its purpose, can select and apply an appropriate subset to fulfill that purpose.

This document can be used in one or more of the following modes:
a) By an organization — to help establish an environment of desired processes.
These processes can be supported by an infrastructure of methods, procedures, techniques, tools and trained personnel.
The organization may then employ this environment to perform and manage its projects and progress software systems through their life cycle stages.
In this mode, this document is used to assess conformance of a declared, established environment to its provisions.
b) By a project — to help select, structure and employ the elements of an established environment to provide products and services.
In this mode, this document is used in the assessment of conformance of the project to the declared and established environment.
c) By an acquirer and a supplier — to help develop an agreement concerning processes and activities.
Via the agreement, the processes and activities in this document are selected, negotiated, agreed to and performed.
In this mode, this document is used for guidance in developing the agreement.
d) By process assessors — to serve as a process reference model for use in the performance of process assessments that may be used to support organizational process improvement.
